---
layout: post
title: "The DACA Precariat"
date: 2020-07-20
image: /assets/images/previews/the-trial-welles.jpeg
categories: DACA, precariat, anxiety, kafka, dfw
description: "In the approaching days for the Supreme Court of the United States
(SCOTUS) to issue a decision on the fate of the Deferred Action for Childhood
Arrivals (DACA), my anxiety levels spiked to the point where it was difficult to
continue regularly working. There were many overwhelming thoughts that I needed
to process; on some days, the ordeal of thought was a herculean task that I
failed to cope."
---

<div class="epigraph">
> The precariat is the first class in history to be losing acquired rights –
> cultural, civil, social, economic and political. [...] The precariat must ask
> for favours, for charity, to show obsequiousness, to plead with figures of
> authority. It is degrading and stigmatizing.
>
> Guy Standing,
> <cite>
> [Meet the precariat, the new global class fuelling the rise of
> populism](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/11/precariat-global-class-rise-of-populism/)
> </cite>
</div>

In the approaching days for the Supreme Court of the United States (SCOTUS) to
issue a decision on the fate of the [Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals
(DACA)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Department_of_Homeland_Security_v._Regents_of_the_University_of_California),
my anxiety levels spiked to the point where it was difficult to continue
regularly working. There were many overwhelming thoughts that I needed to
process; on some days, the ordeal of thought was a herculean task that I failed
to cope. It was the saddening impression of futility that stole my willpower: a
progressive discomfort that began with the increasing staccato of the heart,
transitioning to the psychomotor retardation of the body, and finally
reverberating with apprehension and mental tension in the head.

There are few situations where you are utterly subject to forces beyond your
control. At the very least, in most problems encountered, there is an
independent variable to alter with some determinism to achieve a desired
outcome. With meticulous planning, careful and decisive actions, and a dash of
grit, you can achieve your desires of upward mobility and success, while
concurrently brushing away the problems that come by your way. This idea was
sold to immigrants to the United States as the “American Dream”, an ideological
promise for the chance to realize the future in one’s own image, regardless of
class or wealth.

Unfortunately, having DACA and suffering through the anticipation of the SCOTUS
decision was bucketed in those “few situations'' where the locus of control is
extremely external. I have lived with DACA for eight years, since its onset back
in 2012. I am not ungrateful for the opportunities that were allowed to me in
this country. But for eight long years, my existence has been rooted in
precarity - will we ever achieve the promised permanent solution for those in my
situation? Or, have we been forsaken in a status purgatory between permanent
resident and unwanted non-citizen? Sometimes, I wish this superposition could
just collapse to some status, desirable or not, so that I could have some solid
basis to plan the future around.

The situation of precarity draws unnerving parallels from Franz Kafka’s _The
Trial_, the story of a Josef K., a man arrested for an unspecified crime, and
whose subsequent due process is enforced by a mysterious, absurdist bureaucratic
court. In Josef’s struggle to understand the proceedings regarding his case, he
seeks the advice of the court painter, Titorelli, who has accumulated deep
experience with his observations of the court. Titorelli frighteningly recounts
the possibilities of release for a person before the court.

Three possibilities are illuminated to Josef: actual acquittal, apparent
acquittal, and protraction. The first possibility of actual acquittal, is as the
name suggests. After the conclusion of the case, all associated documents are
destroyed and discarded from the system. However, such a conclusion has never
been observed in the court.

The other two possibilities are more plausible in Josef’s predicament. In the
second possibility of apparent acquittal, all the documents are kept, and the
defendant’s “certification of innocence” is noted for further reference. The
case is still active, as the documents circulate between the lower and higher
courts of the bureaucracy, and at any point, the case can be reopened if the
defendant’s innocence is questioned. This results in a second arrest, and
potentially a second acquittal. And of course, the madness does not end, for
“...the second acquittal is followed by a third arrest, the third acquittal by a
fourth arrest, and so on.” The arrests could come at any moment, unexpectedly.

The third possibility of protraction, keeps the trial “constantly kept at the
lowest stage”, and it the vigilant responsibility of the defendant to never “let
the trial out of [...] sight”, to “[spin the trial] within the tight circle to
which it's artificially restricted.” While the defendant does not have to toil
through unexpected arrests to reopen the trial, as in apparent acquittal, there
are regular actions that have to be undergone. Interrogations, inquiries, and
the like are required for protraction to be successful.

The DACA precariat suffers the latter of these possibilities, a protracted
purgatorial sentence. The nature of DACA provides a two year period where
Immigration and Customs Enforcement exercises prosecutorial discretion, choosing
not to pursue removal of DACA recipients from the United States. Our fate is
kept at this low stage of ruling, at a cost of \$495 every two years, with fear
of constant surveillance and [paranoia to maintain good standing
behavior](https://www.uscis.gov/archive/frequently-asked-questions#criminal_convictions),
lest the government choose not to extend the protracted sentence during the next
renewal.

The decision regarding the fate of DACA, which I remind is not new, for [its
rescission was declared
2017](https://www.dhs.gov/news/2017/09/05/memorandum-rescission-daca), and other
[emerging related immigration
woes](https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/proclamation-suspending-entry-aliens-present-risk-u-s-labor-market-following-coronavirus-outbreak/),
are a grounding reminder that the [“American Dream” is not
guaranteed](https://money.cnn.com/2015/04/22/news/economy/stiglitz-american-dream/index.html).
If the foundation of the house that you have built is suspect, how can you trust
the remainder of the architecture to hold? The foundation is always hidden once
a facade of a structure has been brought up. It is a silent burden that
immigrants carry, never revealed unless the building crumbles to the ground,
exposing the fault of the inferior base. The past SCOTUS ruling on DACA was
another rumbling beneath the ground, testing the security of the visually
secure, yet unstable edifices built by DACA recipients on American soil. In many
cases, the life they have built here on this land is all they have ever known.
It pains me.

Back in 2005, acclaimed author David Foster Wallace [addressed the commencement
of the graduating class of Kenyon
College](https://fs.blog/2012/04/david-foster-wallace-this-is-water/) with a
multitude of his life’s philosophies. In the speech, known as “This is Water”
and published afterwards in book form with a similar title, Wallace reflects on
navigating the banality of post-graduate life, achieving empathy for those with
different worldviews, and the true purpose of a liberal arts education. It is a
fantastic oratory: I highly recommend listening to it if you are feeling
contemplative. I’ve listened to it twice since I discovered it in the beginning
of this year. There is a calming essence in Wallace’s elucidation of life and
its trials that allows me to take a breath while I concurrently undergo its
turbulence.

Unfortunately, this time around there was no peace to be found in his words. It
is no surprise that David Foster Wallace referenced the head as “the terrible
master.” I could not choose to think of anything but my fate in this country;
this thought was prescribed by the SCOTUS proceedings. My control was completely
ripped from my grasp. My thoughts and my state of being were subservient to
another. The true master was the nebulous, kafkaesque bureaucracy, an entity
with the whims to choose my destiny in this country. And in the eternity
required for judgment to be passed, I was being completely hosed.

Before the Thursday of June 18, when the SCOTUS opinion was not yet lucid, I
braced for the worst outcome: the fragile reprieve was coming to an end. In
preparation, I consulted my firm’s immigration lawyer for legal advice for all
my paranoia, with each sick little scenario manifesting itself from fear of all
that is uncertain.

Should I submit the \$495 DACA renewal application before an opinion on the case
is given? After an opinion is given, will accepted renewals continue to be
processed? If not, what will happen to the money to process the application?
What are my options?

If my employment authorization is immediately repealed, and not allowed to
expire naturally, is it still possible to legally work? Will my employment with
the firm be immediately terminated? Will it still be possible to work with the
firm in a different country? What will happen to my current employment-based
change of status application for my green card? What are my options?

Will I be immediately deported? Can you still provide legal advice after I lose
my legal status? What are my options?

And so on. In the shoddy dinghy boat that allowed me to sail through the day to
day, I am imperiled to chart the routes for all my futures, so that I can act
when one is finally realized. In the case that I capsize, I must know all the
directions for the rough swim to any shore, accounting for the fluctuating
landscape of impediments of unknown horrors from below or sweeping riptides that
forcibly take you on the wrong path. If you know me personally, I do not know
how to swim.

I have [played the part you have
modelled](https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2012/06/15/remarks-president-immigration)
us to be. Yet missing papers continue to overshadow my totality. When will the
ocean part and let me walk by my own to dry land, a land I can safely call home?
[Even after a supposedly favorable
decision](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/18/us/DACA-dreamers-supreme-court-immigration.html),
I can only sigh a small breath of relief, for again the proceedings of these
recent events serve as a harsh reminder that my presence in America for the past
nineteen years has always been a provisional existence. And onward I sail,
wondering when they decide what land I can finally call home.

---

Thanks as always to my friends (Reg Ledesma, Rosanne Ng, Jeffrey Zhao, [Annie
Ke](http://annieke.github.io/), Cathy Li, [Neel
Somani](https://www.ocf.berkeley.edu/~neel/), Isabel Ting, Iris Pei, and Alex
Zhang) for reading drafts, providing edits, and making this essay possible with
motivation and support.
