---
layout: post
title: "Gossip, Parody, and Pastiche"
date: 2021-05-15
image: /assets/images/previews/alamo-square-sunset-znerold.jpeg
categories: gossip, morality
description: "Steeping tea is one of my favorite San Francisco picnic pastimes.
The idea of a hobble of twenty-something-year-olds gathered around an
overextravagant charcuterie board, carefully curated to lower defenses and
facilitate information exchange, evokes feelings of entertainment and a
contagious set of giggles"
---

Steeping tea is one of my favorite San Francisco picnic pastimes. The idea of a
hobble of twenty-something-year-olds gathered around an overextravagant
charcuterie board, carefully curated to lower defenses and facilitate
information exchange, evokes feelings of entertainment and a contagious set of
giggles. You definitely won't get this telling of local news in the
neighborhoods from the Chronicle.

In other words, I am talking about chismis. Gossip. I have not been back to the
Philippines since I was four, but I’m almost certain that Daly City, a hotbed
for California Filipino culture, has made its subtle mark on its fellow San
Francisco residents. Or maybe this is the real consequence of the real sharing
economy; even social capital is out for rent.

Exchanging drama is unadulterated entertainment. I love being the narrator of
these tales for my charcuterie brethren. So many different weapons are at my
disposal: marked pauses, divulgence (or withholding) of names, Socratic seminar
to piece together perspectives of a recent happening, and the like. In the end,
a curated story, with a personal injection of the “important details”, is
produced to induce laughter in the audience.

But really, why do we gossip? Matthew Feinberg explains gossip as a way to
[“sustain cooperation and deter selfishness better than those that don't.”](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2014/01/140127193852.htm) At the
charcuterie picnic, if you choose to only listen to the juicy tidbits without
sharing any of your own insights or peculiar happenings, good luck getting a
future invitation. Culturally, it can be seen as [a mutual protective ritual](https://www.nytimes.com/2005/08/16/science/have-you-heard-gossip-turns-out-to-serve-a-purpose.html), as
the sharing of important news about an absent third party can inform behavior in
future interactions.

Of course, there are incentives to tell the truth in these exchanges. In these
small charcuterie circles, information travels fast, and is only inhibited when
means of communication fail to function. Spread false information in
these circles, and expect to be banished once the truth resolves itself.

Since I have been newly influenced by some entertaining libertarian book clubs
from Hanover, New Hampshire, I want to look at gossip from an economic
perspective[^1]. One way to view the exchange of gossip is as a mechanism of
spontaneous order. [An insight from Friedrich Hayek](https://www.kysq.org/docs/Hayek_45.pdf) is
that a price system can act as a “single mind” to possess all relevant
information in making an economic decision:

[^1]: Through the [magic of public listservs](https://listserv.dartmouth.edu/scripts/wa.exe?SUBED1=POLITICAL-ECONOMY-PROJECT&A=1) and [careful omission of my alumni status](https://www.cs.umd.edu/), I was kindly welcomed into a guided reading of Sowell's _Knowledge and Decisions_ and _Economic Facts and Fallacies_. Here to report that I was entertained, but not convinced.

> Fundamentally, in a system in which the knowledge of the relevant facts is
dispersed among many people, prices can act to coordinate the separate actions
of different people in the same way as subjective values help the individual to
coördinate the parts of his plan… The whole acts as one market, not because any
of its members survey the whole field, but because their limited individual
fields of vision sufficiently overlap so that through many intermediaries the
relevant information is communicated to all.

I don’t fully espouse this theory, especially considering that the [market has
steadily progressed to become a simulacra of
reality](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/05/26/magazine/stock-market-coronavirus-pandemic.html).
Not to mention that this neoliberal theory that promotes a decentralized market
system does not match the ordoliberal reality. But it's fun time so let’s
entertain this model since it provides some guidance when used in a local
context.

Let us apply a semblance of the theory to our gossip picnic setup (usually
hosted at Alamo Square Park, my park of choice in San Francisco). If “knowledge
of relevant facts” (second-hand accounts of events, important life updates) “is
dispersed among many people” (the charcuterie circle), “prices” (induced
laughter in relation to the accumulation of relevant facts) can finally “help
the individual to coordinate the parts of his plan”. Now, how are the
individuals helped in this regard? Well, one can think of the charcuterie circle
as a local market of morality. Indeed, if the circle is composed of friends
whose facts (or knowledge of facts) are widely desired, would not their personal
perspective be key as well?

In a sense, we are consuming our friends’ ideas of right and wrong behavior.
Stories of wrong behavior induce laughter, followed by a deconstruction of what
could have happened or what should have happened. Additional normative claims
can be made through discussion within the charcuterie circle.

This is why sharing a curated story to the group is as entertaining as laughing
along and consuming the information (and the salami, cured meats, juicy grapes,
crackers, spreads) of the charcuterie circle. In the vocal illustration of the
story, rooted in a mixture of second-hand observation, trusted information, and
personal interpretation arises a subtle message that is delivered to the group.
Depending on how this message meshes with the group, implicit rules in the
group’s collective sense of morality are either updated or validated.
Kickstarting this process through a story is powerful and hilarious.

I would like to emphasize that these illustrations of events are parody: its key
feature is that the narrator has infused personal opinions in the form of
mockery of the original event. [Frederic Jameson has a nice definition](https://art.ucsc.edu/sites/default/files/Jameson_Postmodernism_and_Consumer_Society.pdf):

> Now parody capitalizes on the uniqueness of these styles and seizes on their
idiosyncrasies and eccentricities to produce an imitation which mocks the
original... Still, the general effect of parody is - whether in sympathy or with
malice - to cast ridicule on the private nature of these stylistic mannerisms
and their excessiveness and eccentricity with respect to the way people normally
speak or write.

Gossip is a representation of the underlying event. By itself, it can be dull.
Only when it is infused with personal values does it become interesting. The
ridiculousness of the event is precisely identified and shared out. In parody,
we impart the takeaway, the lesson from the event to the charcuterie circle. And
through spontaneous order, we see the lesson from the parody taken up or
rejected by the group’s morality, as gauged by induced laughter. Social order
arises.

Future behaviors of individual group members are subject to scrutiny against the
group’s morality. The most consequential behavior is when the member is the
subject of gossip, and the lesson from its parody is already well known
knowledge, as its lesson has been learned and incorporated into the group’s
morality from a previous occasion. With no additional takeaway from the gossip,
it merely a retelling of an event. It is dull.

This sort of gossip is not parody, but pastiche. Again, Frederic Jameson
provides a useful remark here:

> Pastiche is, like parody, the imitation of a
peculiar or unique style, the wearing of a stylistic mask, speech in a dead
language: but it is a neutral practice of such mimicry, without parody's
ulterior motive, without the satirical impulse, without laughter, without that
still latent feeling that there exists something normal compared to which what
is being imitated is rather comic. Pastiche is blank parody, parody that has
lost its sense of humor.

Similar to the outcome of ostracization of those who do not participate in the
gossip or spread untrustworthy information in the group, if you cannot
assimilate the group’s unspoken rules from the training examples of shared
stories, expect to be ousted.

Gossip is a mechanism to understand a group’s collective morality. Is it any
surprise that it’s so fun to pay attention to it, to help shape and reinforce
that narrative?
